<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XL: A Game of Billiards</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-40" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">
				<span epub:type="z3998:roman">XL</span>
				<span epub:type="subtitle">A Game of Billiards</span>
			</h2>
			<p>I was sitting in the lobby of the hotel, reading a number, several days old, of the <i>South China Times</i>, when the door of the bar was somewhat brusquely thrown open and a very long, thin man appeared.</p>
			<p>“Do you care for a game of billiards?” he said.</p>
			<p>“By all means.”</p>
			<p>I got up and went with him into the bar. It was a small hotel, of stone, somewhat pretentious in appearance, and it was kept by a half-caste Portuguese who smoked opium. There were not half a dozen people staying there, a Portuguese official and his wife waiting for a ship to take them to a distant colony, a Lancashire engineer who was sullenly drunk all day long, a mysterious lady, no longer young but of voluptuous appearance, who came to the dining room for meals and went back to her room immediately afterwards, and I had not seen the stranger before. I supposed he had come in that evening on a Chinese boat. He was a man of over fifty, I should think, shrivelled as though the sap had been dried out of him by tropical suns, with a face that was almost brick red. I could not place him. He might have been a skipper out of a job or the agent of some foreign firm in Hong Kong. He was very silent and he made no answer to the casual remarks that I made in the course of the game. He played billiards well enough, though not excellently, but he was a very pleasant fellow to play with; and when he pocketed my ball, instead of leaving me a double balk, gave me a reasonable shot. But when the game was over I should never have thought of him again, if suddenly, breaking his silence for the first time, he had not put me a very odd question.</p>
			<p>“Do you believe in fate?” he asked.</p>
			<p>“At billiards?” I retorted not a little astonished at his remark.</p>
			<p>“No, in life.”</p>
			<p>I did not want to answer him seriously.</p>
			<p>“I hardly know,” I said.</p>
			<p>He took his shot. He made a little break. At the end of it, chalking his cue, he said:</p>
			<p>“I do. I believe if things are coming to you, you can’t escape them.”</p>
			<p>That was all. He said nothing more. When we had finished the game he went up to bed, and I never saw him again. I shall never know what strange emotion impelled him to put that sudden question to a stranger.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
